Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of
the Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops.
And today I'm joined by Doctor Lydia Moland. She's
a professor of Philosophy at Colby College in Waterville Maine
in the US. She has written extensively on 19th
century German philosophy. And more recently, she has
also been interested in abolitionism in the US. And
she wrote a book titled Lydia Maria Child, a
Radical American Life based on the American evolutionist with the
same name. So, Doctor Moland, welcome to
the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. It's a pleasure to be invited and
I'm looking forward to our conversation. OK. So
, uh I would like to start by talking about
your work on 19th century German philosophy. So,
first of all, why did you get interested specifically
in 19th century German philosophy? And do you think
that if anything, there's uh specific aspects of it
that make it distinct from other kinds of philosophy,
from other places and other time periods? Yes.
Thank you for that. Um I got interested in
German 19th century philosophy through Spinoza. So I took
a very general philosophy course as an undergraduate. Uh
and I had intended to be a political science major
, but I read Spinoza and it just blew my
mind and I, I was so moved by the
vision that Spinoza had of holism and of um and
, and the way he argued that I decided to
do more philosophy and ended up in a course that
ended with Kant. And I think as many people
do finished with some very deep dissatisfactions with Kant's dualism
and with his rationalism. And someone said to me
, well, if you are impatient with Kant,
maybe you should try Hegel. Uh So the next
semester, I took a course on the Phenomenology of
Spirit and then I was just hooked. Um and
I ended up going to Tubingen in Germany where Hegel
himself studied, I lived there for a couple of
years and really immersed myself in the culture of that
particular time period. So many of your viewers will
know that Tubing in is also where Holderlin lived and
studied and also shelling. So Hagel was there in
this incredibly fertile environment where people were taking very seriously
. Spinoza was still essentially forbidden. He was still
considered too controversial and too heretical to take seriously.
But they were all sort of closet spin assists.
And um I, I found all of that very
intriguing. I think what, what really pulled me
into Hagel was his attempt to make philosophical sense of
religion and of protestantism. In particularly I came from
a protestant background and was really intrigued by his attempt
to show what was important and vital about the protestant
worldview without attaching it to a kind of uh religious
literalism. Um So that was, that was very
helpful to me, even just in thinking through my
own philosophical questions. So as far as what makes
that period distinct, um a couple of things come
to mind, again, sort of connected to Spinoza
. I think the, again, this idea of
holism, the attempt not to think of philosophy as
just addressing one problem or focusing on just epistemology or
just in the physics. But the idea that an
idea could possibly explain kind of everything. Um I
think characterizes a lot of early 19th century philosophy in
Germany, certainly not later. But sometimes when I
teach students this, I find that, that,
that claim is really strange to them that there could
be one answer or one idea that could explain everything
. But I sometimes push back on that and say
, wouldn't it be even stranger if different parts of
the reality or of philosophy were totally unconnected from each
other? I wouldn't it be sort of strange if
nature functions in a completely different way from art or
from politics or from epistemology? So, isn't there
something even just more intellectually consistent about looking for an
idea that could explain most of human experience and maybe
even nonhuman experience? So that's one another, I
think a lot of really existential questions get started in
the 19th century. So you see that some in
Kant for sure. But I think it took this
generation of thinkers who grew up in the French revolution
, which meant that everything they thought they knew about
the way politics could and should work were um was
, was challenged. And then there were great hopes
around the French revolution and then they were dashed.
And so this was a generation that really grew up
feeling the existential weight of a major historical disappointment if
you were a young person in that generation. Um
And, and so the combination I think of K
turn towards the subject, which really gives an individual
subject an enormous amount of power. And therefore,
also responsibility opens up these big existential questions and then
living in this part of history where there are enormous
shifts um that ask questions like what is the role
of politics and what is the role of the individual
in politics? And how do individuals assert themselves in
the face of great historical forces? Um Those set
the stage for the kinds of grappling with, what
does it mean to be an individual? What does
it mean to be alienated in a society? Um
Obviously something that's been picked up by Marx and then
more by Kirkegaard and Nietzsche later in the century.
Um And then I would also say, and,
and this is clearly in part because of my own
work, a real reorientation around art and around aesthetic
experience. So that certainly gets started in Kant with
his taking seriously aesthetic experience is one of the most
important things about human experience. Um But then when
you get to people like Hegel, but also very
much his contemporaries like Lael or Novalis, Bettina von
Ar Carlina Von Gunder Rode. Um some of these
other people who saw in art and then also in
nature and our aesthetic responses to nature, really central
truths about the human condition. Then I, I
think you get something very interesting that lasts throughout the
century in part because I think one way I try
to think about it is the question, what if
art far from being derivative or entertaining or the thing
that we can philosophize about kind of if we get
to it? What if instead it is the thing
, the thing that that can explain us to ourselves
and the world to ourselves better than other branches of
philosophy. If that's true, then a lot of
things need to be revolved um sort in any kind
of revolution so that I'll stop there. But those
are a couple of the things that I find really
compelling and possibly um I don't know, unique but
certainly indicative of that period in that place in the
world. OK. So I have to tell you
straight away that the three German philosophers whose work I'm
most familiar with are Kent Nietzsche and Schopenhauer. So
uh probably because of some of my personality traits.
I don't know exactly why, but those are the
three I felt most compelled about. And, uh
, I mean, but, uh, of course
, I guess that we could pretty much say that
, uh, everyone in the 19th century in German
was to some extent influenced by Kent. Right?
I mean, even the ones who rejected most of
his philosophy or some, or parts of his philosophy
, like for example, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, Nietzsche
, to a greater extent, even them were very
, very much influenced by Kent. I, I
think we could and of course, uh I mean
, it's not that German philosophy in the 19th centuries
is a monolith, like for example, sometimes people
talk about German idealism, but I mean, you
get into figures like Schopenhauer and Nietzsche and they were
extremely different from can or what you would consider just
general idealism. Nietzsche particularly sometimes is classified as a
romantic or rationalist and he certainly rejected many aspects of
Kent's philosophy. And Schopenhauer was very much a pessimist
for example. So, uh but I mean,
do you think that we could look uh even with
those differences? And of course, we could talk
about the other philosophers and they certainly have m many
distinct things about their philosophical corpus, I think.
But uh do you think that e even with all
of those differences and existentialism also that I didn't mention
and all of that, that we can still find
recurrent themes in 19th century German philosophy. Yeah,
I mean, I, I think one really is
the struggle with the nature of subjectivity and what it
means. Epistemological, metaphysically, politically, aesthetically.
Uh What does it mean to be a self?
And like if you think not to oversimplify, but
if you think about someone like Descartes just saying,
well, the self is a thinking thing. It's
essentially an immaterial substance. Um its essence is just
to think and it subsists as a thinking thing.
Um You know, a quick contrast to Kant,
I think is Kant's idea of this self as an
activity. So as something that is actively synthesizing whatever
is coming at it and that it only achieves selfhood
through being active. And I think in a way
, one of the questions that survives all the way
through the century then is um what kind of activity
is that? And what does the basis of thinking
through subjectivity? Um mean for objectivity and for reality
and for how we treat other people and obviously paired
with that is the question of whether there is a
transcendent divine that humans are beholden to or created by
and who dictates reality as we see it. And
in my opinion, Hagel, for instance, is
trying very hard to reorient us from that to seeing
that humans are the only creators of meaning and that
we only create meaning in cooper operation with each other
. So there's, if you think about kind as
primarily thinking of the subject as activity. Hagel,
I think picks that up but with a much stronger
emphasis on the kind of mutual recognition that's necessary to
think about my being a subject is dependent on your
recognizing me as a subject. And only when we
recognize each other, not just abs as abstract subjects
, but as subjects embodied in different roles and different
areas of history, different life plans. Can we
really treat each other with the dignity and respect that
Kant had originally said we owed each other. And
so I think like if you follow that trajectory out
um and start to think about like Kirke guards grappling
with what it meant to be a subject kind of
at odds with um with the conventional world or norms
that were established by a society that he didn't feel
um acknowledged by. And then someone like Nietzsche,
who I think is even more expressly celebrating the agony
and the ecstasy of being a self creating subject.
So I think in, in Nietzsche much more than
in Hegel, you get again the existential. Yeah
, I'll say it again, agony and ecstasy of
the fact that we have to create our own meaning
where we can't rely on the divine or on nature
as something separate from us to tell us what is
meaningful, we have to do it ourselves. And
that um is a great privilege and honor, but
also an enormous responsibility that I think in Nietzsche's view
more than in Hagel's only some people are really up
to shouldering. So in, in each of them
, you get the sense that lots of people would
just really rather prefer to have others tell them what
is meaningful. Um And our calling is to resist
that. I think Hagel, for instance, is
much less interested in that kind of resistance and more
interested in trying to think of ourselves as a cooperating
group of people, each with our own subjectivities.
But working out our subjectivity and our bid for freedom
very much with each other as opposed to in the
kind of individualistic way that you get with Nietzsche.
That subjectivity part. I mean, what I'm going
to say now, if I say something that you
don't agree with or you think is incorrect, please
correct me. But uh I mean, of course
, in someone like Nietzsche and is to some extent
, perspect perspective is philosophy because he, he particularly
in beyond good and evil, for example. And
when and when it comes to morality more specifically,
there, there are places in his work where he
expresses a very uh perspective perspective on, on things
uh uh and things seem to be very dependent on
the subject and subjectivity. But uh I mean,
uh don't you think that even in Kent, particularly
when uh in the critic of purism, he talks
about, for example, the limits of, of
our uh o of the information we can get from
our senses, the uh th those kinds of limits
and, and also the fact that we uh sort
of uh have some sort of categories of understanding.
And I think that some of them, they,
it takes from, I guess Aristotle, if I'm
not mistaken and expands on them, I mean,
the a and then the, and then also when
he gets into the, the antinomy and he talks
about the things that even as through a reasoning process
cannot fully answer. Like for example, if there's
life after death, if there's a God, if
the universe is infinite in time and space questions like
that. Uh I, I mean, that isn't
there, even if only a tiny seed of subjectivity
planted there because I mean, it seems that there's
the thing in itself or whatever reality is and then
our own limitations as human subjects when it comes to
perceiving it and getting an objective understanding of what it
is. I, I mean, I, I
don't know, what are your thoughts on this?
Yeah, absolutely. I think that's 100% right?
And I think that's a kind of radical postulate that
I don't even think Kant felt the existential weight of
which is to say it took someone. Well,
I, I, I'm much more familiar with the
early romantics, you know, the Schlegel and,
and Schelling and, and Novalis and Gunter Rode and
people like that who took that. I, I
just feel like much more to heart and as you
say, I think it is partly dispositional or generational
that, you know, can have laid those things
out fairly matter of factly. But I think that
the consequences for how we think about our role in
, on our responsibility in the world and the radical
perspect nature of that, as you say, um
was really exhilarating and upsetting to more to the next
generation of thinkers. So getting into Hegel and specifically
, of course, you've already said a few things
about him, but getting specifically to into aesthetics because
when we think about Hegel, I mean, people
who are not philosophers and not specifically very familiar with
Hegel's philosophy, we tend to just think about his
more systematic and abstract approaches to history and uh uh
thesis, antithesis synthesis and stuff like that. But
he also in fact wrote about aesthetics. Yes.
And that was part of his system for sure.
So um aesthetics is the first part of absolute spirit
. So if you think of, of, you
know, the system writ large, you've got um
you know, subjective spirit and the first you have
logic and then you have philosophy of nature and then
in philosophy of spirit, you first have subjective spirit
and then objective spirit and then absolute spirit. Absolute
spirit is where Hagel talks about the three ways that
he thinks humans grapple with what it means to be
human. So the ways in which we reflect on
um on the world, but also on our role
in the world. So the first of those is
art and then religion and then being a philosopher,
Hagel always has philosophy win at the end. So
philosophy for Hagel is still the best um most complete
and most explicit way that humans reckon with their um
their own status and ask themselves about meaning in the
world. But art has a really important place in
that for Hagel because we are embodied sensual beings.
And contrary to what some people think about Hagel,
he doesn't regret that. I mean, it isn't
that if we could, we should get rid of
that part of ourselves. I think he thinks that
that's a very rich and very vital way in which
humans remain part of the natural world. So we
continue to feel and smell and hear things um that
are outside of us. But we also use our
senses to create things that then mean something to us
and that reflect our own grappling with that meaning.
So I think that for Hegel, aesthetics is the
sensuous way of experiencing truth. So truth for Hegel
again, back to Spinoza is this very holistic view
of the identity of identity and difference. So he
says the true is the whole, it's the thing
that brings together contraries and this is where people get
the thesis sis synthesis um theme that you just referred
to. And so art is the way that we
can sense that truth through our senses as opposed to
understanding it through narratives, which is the way Hegel
characterizes religion. So interestingly, religion for him is
primarily about narrative stories that we tell ourselves to explain
everything from the origin of the world to um you
know, our own relationship to each other through.
And then philosophy is supposed to do that without narrative
and without our senses. So just through thought.
So then within aesthetics, Hagel's project is to say
how art does that and which kinds of art and
which particular instances of art do that best? So
for him, the question always is, is this
particular art form or this particular artwork allowing us to
sense the idea which is the unity of unity and
division or the true? That is the whole.
So he does this um in a couple of ways
. Um One by giving what some people call the
first really philosophical history of art. I always think
people are too quick to assign first to anything and
usually when they do that, it's to a male
European philosopher. And I think that is often not
true. So I try to be skeptical about that
. Um but whether he was first or not,
he certainly had a very influential idea of the sort
of history and progress of art. So that's in
what's part two of his lectures on the philosophy of
art. And then he has a whole part three
and I'm happy to get into it. This is
one of my major claims in my book on Hagel's
aesthetics is that part three has been essentially neglected by
HGL scholars. But that's where he talks about what
he calls individual arts, which are architecture, sculpture
, painting, music, and poetry. Importantly,
in that order, because that's the order in which
Hagel thinks he can explain how humans increasingly come to
take ownership of their own um art. So I'm
happy to talk about that later. But anyway,
so that's that in general um is where aesthetics and
the philosophy of art fits in Hegel's system. And
the, the other big claim that I make in
my book on Hagel's aesthetics is that we learn so
much about Hagel's idealism through his aesthetics. So it's
not just that OK, we get Hagel's system and
then when we have time, we can do the
aesthetics. But if we don't understand the aesthetics,
we don't understand really crucial things about Hagel's theory of
selfhood, about feeling about perception, like things that
, that people usually talk about under the heading of
, you know, metaphysics or epistemology. Um But
I think there's a lot to learn about those more
traditional fields. Um Well, see, I shouldn't
even say traditional fields because that, that wasn't the
case in Hegel's generation that people thought that metaphysics and
epistemology were like the core philosophical um enterprises and aesthetics
was just derivative really the opposite. Um So it's
more because of the way philosophy developed, especially in
the early 20th century that we've come to think that
um again, so part of what I'm, what
I try to do here is, is, is
reorient us towards thinking about it the other way.
So there's something that you mentioned there that I would
like to get more into. So, and,
and please correct me if I'm wrong. But it
seems then that in a way uh the way Hegel
approaches aesthetics, I mean, it's not as some
sort of a separate field or domain from all the
other domains of philosophy, like epistemology, probably ethics
and metaphysics because uh I mean, isn't it also
that as Hegel uh understands art and aesthetics more generally
, that it ties very much to epistemology for example
, and how we understand the world and how we
acquire knowledge about it. Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely
. So we don't, there are things that we
can only sort of know through our senses. So
that's an epistemological question. And there are ways in
which our status as embodied beings can only be known
to us through our senses. And so if we
don't talk about art, we're not talking about a
key part of epistemology. And I think that Hagel
has a pretty clear sense that our senses are,
uh again, it's not, sometimes people think that
Hagel thinks that we'd be best if we were disembodied
and I just think that's absolutely false. Um So
, in so far as part of what we know
is embodied and there is such a thing as embodied
knowledge, this is where we get it, we
get it through aesthetics. And I should say,
you know, strangely, especially coming after Kant and
Shelling Hegel is completely uninterested in natural beauty. Like
he just doesn't even really want to talk about it
. Um He, he is almost exclusively interested in
the philosophy of art and in aesthetics as an artistic
phenomenon. Um But other people have certainly talked a
lot more about our aesthetic appreciation of nature. And
Schiller is a great example of that. And it's
always been very surprising to me that Hagel doesn't engage
with that conversation in Schiller more than he does.
Um But yes, absolutely. Um So like to
give you an example when he talks about music,
music for Hegel is the way we sense time.
And if you think about Kant, talking about time
is one of the two oper intuitions through which that
is necessary to our understanding the world and having experience
at all. For Hegel. Music is the thing
that in the, in the most pure sense allows
us to sense time and since time is so critical
to selfhood, so there's no selfhood without time in
a way. He thinks that music allows us to
sense the self. I mean, it doesn't get
more root epistemological and metaphysical than that. So what
, what music allows us to do is have this
very pure sense of what is so purely part of
our existence, namely time. And that Hagel thinks
is why music literally moves us, I mean,
literally and metaphorically. So you can be moved by
music emotionally. But Hagel himself says that sometimes without
knowing it, we'll start tapping our feet when or
moving our body. I love that image of Hagel
it like, you know, we tended to give
him as such a serious German philosopher and he was
. But um but he himself recognizing that sometimes he
couldn't help but move, you know, that that's
really uh deep, deep knowledge of ourselves. And
again, the knowledge without which I think Hagel thinks
our own understanding of ourselves would be impoverished. That's
all very interesting. I mean, oo one of
the things that I find fascinating about some philosophers is
that nowadays through science, we are confirming some of
their ideas or intuitions, things that they've arrived at
uh without uh II, I mean, not through
science as at least as we understand it today,
of course. But for example, when you were
talking there about uh embodiment and embodied knowledge, I
mean, nowadays, we have an entire field of
embodied cognition and how we acquire knowledge through, not
just through operations that occur in our brain, but
through our brain being connected to the rest of our
body and how we move in the world and the
actions we do and how we interact with things.
And I, I mean, it's really fascinating to
me and uh I mean, as I said,
I'm more familiar with people like Nietzsche, but even
Nietzsche, we could say was very much a philosopher
of action. I mean, he, he loved
to walk a lot and thinking while he was walking
and he talked about doing philosopher, philosophy with a
hammer and, and they very much admire people of
action. And I, I mean, doing things
instead of just sitting and thinking and have this sort
of more platonic vision of things that perhaps we could
or should in a way try to disembody ourselves,
which in a way seems very, uh, uh
, II, I mean, uh, the,
there's a very interesting caricature of that. I,
I don't know if you ever watched the movie,
The Adventures Of Baron Munchausen. But there's a,
there's a scene there played by Robin Williams where he's
, uh, uh, the king of the moon
. I think it's the king of the moon,
but the man on the moon and he can separate
his head from the rest of the body just to
try to become more enlightened and it doesn't really work
. So I think it's a very, uh,
a very funny parody of that sort of, uh
disembodied idea of nationality or epistemology. So, yeah
. Yeah. And I do think that Hagel,
despite his reputation, also resisted that kind of reification
of reason and of the mind. Um, and
, you know, there's a lot of that in
his philosophy of subjective spirit too when he talks about
anthropology and um in psychology and ways in which our
minds are very formed by what happens around us.
And it talks about insanity in those passages as being
very much tied to our embodied um existence. So
there's, there's way more of that in HGL than
most people think. And again, I think the
aesthetics are a wonderful way to get at that.
I mean, I'll, I'll say one other thing
about it. I think part of what Hagel really
appreciated about art is that we go through our everyday
lives, sensing things, but not being aware that
we're sensing them. So not being aware of ourselves
as seeing and as hearing and as touching. And
when we do that, I think Hagel thinks we
risk beginning to treat the world as something that's just
out there that's a given. You know, so
mcdowell and Brandon have been talking about this for a
very long time. Mcdowell, especially the myth of
the given, right? So the world is out
there and what epistemology is, is just our,
like attaching our ideas to the outside world in uh
in an accurate way. And I think Hagel thinks
that that that happens in part just out of habit
, of course. So when I walk by a
tree, I can't every time think, wow,
I'm seeing a tree. And even though, you
know, it seems this way from this perspective,
it's actually a different way from that. Like I'd
never get through my day. Um But what art
does is remind us of what our senses are doing
by disrupting that in really interesting ways. So,
and one example would be looking at a painting and
realizing that I can see three dimensions where there aren't
three dimensions. And that tells me something about the
interaction of my mind with the world. So we
might think of a painting is a paradigmatic example of
something that just exists independently outside of us. But
actually for it to exist as a painting, there
has to be someone looking at it and perceiving it
in a certain way. And Hagel thinks that that
kind of mutual formation between the self and the world
actually is what is true of us all day,
every day. But we get used to it,
it becomes and this is a really important technical term
for him. Prosaic, right? We start to
treat it as just sort of normal and given and
, and, and as existing independently of us.
And what art reminds us is that in fact,
everything that we sense and everything that we do is
part of our mutual engagement and formation with the world
. And I think Hegel famously doesn't articulate a theory
of aesthetic experience the way Khan does. So,
Kant says, you know, it's the playing of
the faculties and that's part of why it gives us
pleasure is because it gives us a break from our
kind of prosaic parsing of the world Hagel doesn't ever
actually say that. But I think what he implies
is that when we are disrupted, out of our
prosaic attitude towards the world into a more aesthetic attitude
towards it, we're actually sensing truth in a way
that we don't otherwise. So if I go from
just seeing the tree to having an aesthetic experience of
the tree, that's actually a more true experience of
the tree. And that's part of what gives me
joy. So I think that's part of what Hagel
thinks is going on in all kinds of aesthetic pleasure
. So uh there was a point there uh in
my previous question where you mentioned the fact that at
a certain point in his work on aesthetics, Hegel
talks about how humans can take ownership of their art
through specific kinds of art. Could you tell us
a little bit more about that? Yeah. So
this is behind his trajectory from architecture to sculpture to
what he calls or actually it's one of his um
editors. But anyway, the three romantic arts which
are painting music and poetry. So, and many
other philosophers like Herder had put art into a different
trajectory. So I think one really good way of
trying to figure out what Hagel is up to is
to compare those and and you know, why does
he put what at the top? Um So for
Hegel architecture is the art form that feels most externalized
to humans, right? So it's big in scope
. It's also usually functional, although he often,
he also talks about architecture that's not functional. Um
And it, it has to do primarily with matter
that seems independent of humans. So stone or brick
or wood and then sculpture also has a more um
and an externalized material. So whether that's marble or
plaster or whatever, but in sculpture, at least
paradigmatic sculpture as Hagel understands it, humans start to
reflect themselves in it. So paradigmatic sculpture for Hegel
is ancient Greek sculpture where um humans are no longer
making uh like monstrous, exaggerated forms, but more
just straight up human forms. So that's, that's
more attention to the human and more attention to the
subjective. And then when you get to painting music
and poetry, you're increasingly focusing humans attention on what's
going on inside of them as arts material. So
color doesn't, I mean, it's let me put
it this way. It's more obvious to us that
color doesn't exist in the world the way that stone
exists in the world. OK. So Hagel still
doesn't think that we should talk about stone as existing
independently of us. But leaving that aside, painting
more obviously points out to us our involvement in whatever
is painted. And so I already talked about like
perspective, but that's true also of color. And
Hagel likes to talk about how it's possible for a
human to see a form like a human, not
even by drawing, but just by juxtaposing colors against
each other. So even if there isn't a human
form drawn, if you juxtapose the colors, a
human will see a drawing where there isn't one,
right? So again, more activity on the part
of the subject and then music, as I was
saying a minute ago, same thing. Music is
totally interior, right? So there we can't really
talk about any material that's outside, like we can
talk about the instruments, but the instruments aren't the
music and they certainly aren't my experience of the music
. So that's totally interior and then poetry. So
Hagel and this is one of the the interesting differences
between Hagel and other philosophers including Schopenhauer, right?
So Schopenhauer puts music at the top because he wants
really to highlight that kind of subjectivity. But Hagel
is always interested in the unity of identity and difference
, right? So he doesn't want to stop at
subjectivity. He wants to go back to integrating subjectivity
back into objectivity. And so when we get to
poetry, we have um something that's 100% human creation
, namely language as material, but it's, it's
not as subjective as music because language is something that
you and I have to agree on on some level
. Otherwise it wouldn't count as language if I just
start, you know, speaking gibberish, that might
be my private language, but it's not going to
function like language unless I'm in dialogue, literally,
not just with one person, but with a whole
culture. So then when we get to as a
kind of poetry, which then embodies language as this
very human creation and this very mutually formed creation back
into action, right? So then you have characters
embodied characters back to embodiment, embodied characters on a
stage using language that's been mutually agreed upon, not
just between individuals but by a culture. Then Hagel
thinks we've got a really profound experience of collective aesthetic
creation that can unite us as a community while also
showcasing the kind of subjectivity that a character like Antigone
or Hamlet is experiencing. So, um so that's
the way in which Hagel, that's why Hagel orders
them the way he orders them and decides that drama
is the most complete form of aesthetic experience, which
does not. And we'll probably get to this in
a minute. Um Mean that he thinks that it's
the best form of art, but it is the
highest aesthetic experience philosophically for humans. You know,
uh while you were talking, I was thinking at
a certain point because you mentioned Schopenhauer there that uh
if um uh I mean, of course, you
probably already alluded to some of that in your answer
. But uh I was wondering what extent Hegel's statics
also connects to his metaphysics because when you mentioned Schopenhauer
, I mean, Schopenhauer is um a, at
least for us more modern contemporary people, it's a
bit of a weird idea. But uh if,
if I understand it correctly. I think that,
uh OK, so, um Schopenhauer took that division
from Kent, uh the division between the Neuman and
, and the phenomenon and the phenomenons uh the Ninon
sorry, supposedly is what reality itself is. I
mean, the fundamental nature of reality. And uh
and this is also something I, I guess that
Nietzsche talks about in the, the origin of tragedy
because back then in his first book, he was
already very much influenced by Schopenhauer. He then uh
uh left some of that out of his philosophy later
on. But uh didn't Schopenhauer have this sort of
idea that music itself was part of the fundamental nature
of reality. Yeah. Absolutely. And that,
and for Schopenhauer, the reason we love music so
much and the reason it moves us so much is
because it is the most raw experience of reality we
can get. And uh absolutely, it, it
moves us because it is also, you know,
and this is, I think is, is the
kind of thing Hagel thought too that the joy that
we get in it and in and its immediate access
to our emotions so that music can make us sad
about nothing, right? So it's not if I
listen to sad music, I'm not sad about anything
. I'm just sad. That's incredible. Like the
fact that that's possible. Schopenhauer thinks says something really
profound about the nature of reality and about the nature
of being human. And I think Hagel is attuned
to that as well. And it doesn't be again
because he's more interested in thinking about a society in
which people work together. I mean, Hagel,
I sometimes say to my students is just more interested
in like making sure that the society functions. And
so he's, he's much more interested in saying,
OK, what institutions are going to be necessary for
us to create a society in which humans can live
to their full potential. And someone like Schopenhauer,
as I understand him is, is just much less
interested in that. So I think Hagel wants to
pull back from this kind of ra education of subjectivity
and say, OK, it's really good. It's
really important fundamental to modern humans. Now, we've
got to show how it can be fostered within institutions
. And so I think that's part of why um
music doesn't top the list for him and to your
original question about metaphysics. Absolutely. I mean,
this is the structure of reality as far as Hagel
is concerned, the identity of identity and difference.
And so the, the way in which the trajectory
of the arts, including music's subordinate place to drama
into poetry in general is a metaphysical commitment on Hagel's
part. Absolutely. Uh And uh I mean,
you mentioned drama there. Uh Did Hegel have specific
views about tragedy and comedy? Yes, this is
something I thought about a lot. Um And probably
many of your viewers will know that Hagel is most
famous for talking about tragedy. So his interpretation of
antigone has been in particular, very influential. And
I mean, the thousands of pages that have been
written on that are testament to how, how important
and revelatory his theory of tragedy was. But um
much less attention has been paid to his theory of
comedy. And so I got really interested in that
at a certain point. Um Both what Hagel says
about comedy and why it has been um not taken
as seriously, really quick answer to the second question
that's just really typical that philosophers um tend to take
serious things more seriously. And unless you want to
take comedy seriously and therefore risk being comic yourself because
how ridiculous is it to take comedy seriously? Um
People don't do it. I, I have uh
spent probably more time in my life than I should
taking comedy very seriously. I teach a course on
it. Um And that, that is in part
because I, yeah, I got interested in what
Hagel says about tragedy and comedy. So in short
, and I'm much more focused on what he says
about it in his lectures on aesthetics rather than what
he says in the phenomenology. But I do think
they are, they are connected tragedy for Hegel shows
a kind of subjectivity, very entrenched in itself and
in roles in particular in like social roles. So
if you think about antigone, she is struggling with
her role as a daughter and as a sister and
as a subject, right? So her brothers have
been killed, she wants to bury one of them
. She feels that that's her duty. Her uncle
, the king is also her king now and she's
supposed to obey him and he forbids this, um
, since one of her brothers was a traitor.
So the, the tragedy there is between two people
who are deeply invested in their subjective relationships to their
roles and those roles are incompatible. So there's no
way for it to end without one of them dying
. Um It's not several people die, but you
know, of the two of them, only one
of them dies. And so I, but in
so far as Hegel is always interested in the unity
of unity and division. What you get there is
two people whose conflict with each other cancels itself out
and then what you get at the end the synthesis
. Although Hagel doesn't use that word is the survival
of the Greek City state with increased knowledge of how
those roles have to be treated within the Polish.
So Creon ends the play essentially admitting that he shouldn't
have had the attitude that he had to his role
. So, so for Hagel, the reason that
tragedy is art is because it shows this clash,
which ends in a kind of unification comedy, also
ancient comedy and Hagel's favorite is Aristophanes also ends in
reunification. But it's because like if you take streps
sides as an example in the clouds, he doesn't
take himself so seriously. So he, you know
, kind of goofs around and he undermines the city
and then, you know, he cheats and he
, and he's never like fixed on his role and
that gives him an enormous amount of power. And
so in the clouds, in particular, you also
see the, like the beginning of the erosion of
the idea that the gods are really in control because
they're being mocked in strips and, and they had
been before, this isn't new in Aristophanes necessarily.
But at the end of that, you get a
kind of cheerful reunification. And Hegel actually says,
um at another point, you know, maybe that's
better, you know, why would we choose the
dark and um desperate conflict of tragedy over the cheerful
life affirming? And I think there's a lot of
this in Nietzsche too, life affirming laughter of someone
who doesn't have to be so beholden to his roles
that he's willing to bring the whole society down around
him. So there's a, there's a, an
extended story that I'm happy to tell if, if
you're interested um about how that changes in modern tragedy
and modern comedy. Um But Hagel is pretty pessimistic
about both mo modern tragedy and modern comedy. Um
And essentially, I think, thinks that we're going
to have to transcend both of them or, and
this is another big topic, move to more of
a humor based aesthetic than a comedy based aesthetic,
right? Uh I'm going to ask you more about
that, about modern comedy and tragedy in a second
. But I, I mean, I just wanted
to make a brief comment because this was to some
extent, I mean, uh the, the way
people like Hegel, Schopenhauer Nietzsche and others in the
19th century approached uh aesthetics and art uh somewhat reminds
me of uh how dismissive uh the post Socratic were
of the Pres Socratic because the Pre Socratic took the
poets and uh seriously when it comes to uh I
mean, perhaps uh also being able to acquire some
sort of knowledge through art, through fiction and all
of that. And I, and I, and
I mean, of course, I, I don't
think we can really be sure about what part of
it came from Socrates or Plato because sometimes we don't
know for sure if it's Socrates or Plato talking,
but in Plato's works. But anyway, I,
I mean, the Socrates and the, the other
Greek philosophers who came after him were very dismissive of
Homer specifically and the other poets. And when you
think about the Pres Socratic and even what we call
the Sophists, I, I mean, nowadays,
sophistry has a very negative connotation to it, but
the Sophists were very much philosophers themselves, I think
. Uh so I, I wa I was just
, I mean, it just came to my mind
that uh there are, there have been periods in
Western philosophy, where people have very much been dismissive
of art, at least as a potential source of
some kind of knowledge and others where people really engaged
with art seriously and philosophically took art seriously. Yeah
. Absolutely. Yeah. And I think this is
the 19th century, is one place where that pen
direction. So tell us about the issues that Hegel
had with modern forms of art, particularly uh with
what we could call, I guess modern subjectivity in
art because uh as time went on and particularly since
the, I guess, more or less the 19th
century onwards, I mean, in literature and other
forms of art, we see people focusing more on
particular characters and character development and there's objectivity even what
goes on in their minds through ex through lots and
lots of, of, of texts sometimes just focusing
on their inner thoughts and all of that. II
, I guess that's what we could call a modern
subjectivity in art to uh or perhaps there's also some
other forms of subjectivity. But what did Hegel think
about it? I think one of the best places
to isolate that is in what he says about humor
. And yeah, and I think humor was a
really new aesthetic phenomenon. It essentially began with Lawrence
Stern's Tristam Shandy, which was enormously popular in Germany
. I mean, Goethe and Schiller and Lessing and
anybody who was anybody um loved Stern and his evocation
of characters who were not comic in the classic sense
of like, Aristophanes. Um, but were kind
of quirky and had foibles and eccentricities that made you
kind of gently laugh at them. So, not
mock them, not guffaw but, but just recognize
how much humans get obsessed with what stern called their
hobby horses. Like their little things that they're,
the, the little things that they wanna be obsessed
about. So, you know, whether it's your
train set or his, you know, his uncle's
military, uh what was it? It wasn't exactly
a like models, I guess. Anyway, um
So Hagel thought that comedy and, and humor needed
to be differentiated as, as did um pretty much
everybody in his um generation. So comedy as a
kind of dramatic art form and humor as something that
more suffused literature and poetry and that highlighted again this
sense that what is really important to pay attention to
among humans now is that since we've discovered as it
were that we are the source of meaning in the
world, what is meaningful to us and how kind
of adorably silly that often is like how adorably silly
many of our concerns are. And I think Hegel
thought that was really valuable aesthetically because it brought attention
to, you know, the the concerns of art
are no longer the gods or big battles or even
like sublime landscapes, but like Dutch genre paintings or
still lifes that show tiny little involved human obsessions with
flowers or having your tooth pulled or, you know
, like everyday human things, but he did not
like it when people became so subjective that they didn't
try to extract any larger meaning from whatever it was
that they were doing. So he was very critical
of Jean Paul Richter on this point, very critical
of people like Schlegel, Friedrich Schlegel. And you
know, to a lesser extent, people like Novalis
who Hagel thought were way too focused on their own
interiority and stream of consciousness essentially as you were just
describing and therefore, again, never made the connection
back from subjectivity back into objectivity and therefore, were
not giving their audiences an experience of the truth.
So that's always what's at stake for Hagel. Um
So he's very critical of what he calls subjective humor
and very admiring of what he calls objective humor.
Do you think that Hagel would have been a,
a fan? Or at least like to some extent
the existentialists, do you think that Hegel would have
been a, a fan or at least like to
some extent the existentialists? I'm not so sure he
would have been to be honest with you. I
think he, he, as I said earlier,
he was really interested in making a society function on
an institutional level. So what kind of form of
government do we need? What kind of um social
order, what kind of economic order, what kind
of family situation and in so far as existentialists and
this is generalizing but often emphasize the subject in opposition
to those things. I think Hagel would have again
, felt like, well, but what we're after
here is truth, which is the unity of unity
and division, not just division. And we have
a world to run like it's our responsibility to run
this world. There's no God out there to help
us out, there's no natural order like we've got
to get this right. And if there's, and
again, this is to caricature. But if existentialists
are sometimes seen as self obsessed or just as oppositional
to the order, I think Hagel would have been
much more interested in reforming the order in ways that
would better allow humans to be free and the way
he thought humans needed to be free. And that
back to something we were saying a minute ago,
I think this is something that Marx picks up from
. Hagel is very much about what kind of material
conditions do humans need in order to be free.
So it's not enough to say as Kant did um
that you're free if you're self determining and can act
against your inclinations in accordance with the categorical imperative.
I realize that Kant scholars are going to say that
that's not all he meant. And, and I
accept that, but Hagel was much more explicit in
trying to say what real freedom means is paying attention
to what people need in institutions around them. And
you know, just life forms around them in order
to be, to flourish as humans with dignity and
respect. So again, that's maybe too hard on
the existentialist. But I, I think that might
be his general take. That's very interesting because o
of course, we know that Marx was influenced by
Hegel to some extent, but sometimes because people have
these simplistic views of Hegel and Marx they think,
oh, how could it be? Because Hegel was
supposedly a big idealist and Marx was a me realist
. I mean, how could they be more opposite
? But uh I mean, what you mentioned there
and uh Hegel caring very much about how we structure
society, about the institutions we create and how we
create them based on what values, I guess.
Uh I mean, it's very much uh I guess
also applied philosophy or political philosophy as some of what
Marx also cared about. Absolutely. And I,
you know, I think another thing that you can
find in Hegel that I think is just much more
clearly articulated in Marx is that freedom can be a
kind of ideological lie if you continue to tell people
that they're free as a way of distracting them from
the fact that they're being exploited and alienated, right
? So if you make people focus on, yes
, but I'm a free and determining being because I
can follow the categorical imperative, which I, I
again, that's a caricature. Um Then people are
going to feel like, well, you know,
who cares what sort of deprived economic situation I live
in. I'm still free and Hagel, I think
, worried that that kind, that, that kind
of idea could fall into the wrong hands of people
who knew how to manipulate it. Such that exactly
as you said, you know, you can be
a, a worker who's being totally exploited. But
as long as you're told that there's a kind of
freedom that exists in transcending that or not caring about
it or, or that actually, you know what
it is to be human is to, to subsist
despite the struggle of economic depravity, I think Hagel
also would say that's just, that's manipulative, it's
deceitful and it's unethical. Uh it's, it's,
it is not, it is false freedom, it
is empty, fake, false freedom. And it
can be a kind of uh a tool in the
hands of people who want to manipulate others into ignoring
the ways in which they're being exploited, which is
very interesting because I guess that this is also another
idea that people do not tend at all to associate
with Hegel. But as Marx, he also cared
about the poverty, right? And about the causes
of poverty and the potential effects it would have on
people's behavior. Correct. Yeah. So this is
specifically in the passages where he talks about what's called
the rabble. And, and I think this is
again, a distinction that Marx picks up on that
what Hagel means by the rabble is not just people
who are impoverished. So and Hagel, like many
people thinks that there will always be poverty. But
what's new since, you know, well, not
new now, but new since the modern world essentially
is the claim that all humans are worthy of dignity
and respect and the acknowledgement or just the fact that
our economies are human creations. So whereas poverty before
could be explained just by natural phenomenon or just by
a hierarchy that we were told was natural. You
know, the king gets to be rich and you
have to be poor because God made him the king
and made you a pauper. Now, the combination
of the claim that all humans are worthy of dignity
and respect and a human created economy, that means
that many people live in total depravity generates a kind
of rage on the part of what Hagel then calls
the rabble. Um that is entirely justified and that
Hagel sees as a pretty existential threat to modern society
because they're right, right. It's, it's not
that we need them to get over this fact that
they're right about it. And as long as that's
true, they, you know, society will be
unstable because they will correctly demand the material conditions.
For the thing that they're told is their kind of
existential, right. So in HGL talks about ways
to solve that through essentially what we would call labor
unions or other forms within civil society that would and
within the government that would represent not just geographical interests
but economic interests. So when, when you look
at what Hagel says about the form the state should
take, I think one of the most overlooked facts
is that he does not want purely geographical representation.
He doesn't want, you know, Prussia gets two
delegates and Bavaria gets two delegates and no following is
two delegates but that different classes and different kinds of
um of industry get representation. So that to me
is very clear evidence that he was worried about not
just the material conditions of capitalism, but also the
questions of identity and self-respect that are necessary in the
modern work world um that are essentially trampled on by
capitalism. And so um could we say that Hegel
like Marx was also or thought that it was a
moral imperative for society to try as best as we
could to alleviate or ideally eradicate poverty? Yeah,
absolutely. I I don't think Hale thought it could
be completely eradicated. But um yeah, I there's
no question in my mind that he saw this as
the deepest and most insidious kind of hypocrisy that a
society would say on the one hand that everyone is
equal and deserving of dignity and respect and then continue
to choose um an an economic system that made that
a joke, right? And it's very bad joke
, a sad joke. Um It made it laughable
in the worst possible way. And that a society
that continues down that road is both morally responsible and
in danger of instability. So I do, I
do think Hagel thinks those two things are separate.
So a better functioning society is going to be 11
with less inequality. But also that totally aside,
just as a moral issue. Um yeah, this
is a classic failure and just to be totally clear
because at a certain point there, you mentioned the
fact that some of these ideas stem from the more
general idea that people, individual, people themselves have
intrinsic value. I mean, this is not just
a matter of caring about alleviating poverty with the long
term success of a particular society in mind, but
also caring actually about the individuals themselves and the conditions
they live in. Yes and their emotional and effective
attachment to their value as workers. So when he
starts to talk about solutions to this kind of poverty
, he says, you know, you can certainly
get government agencies involved in essentially welfare, but that's
not going to fix the problem of self-respect. You
have to give people the possibility of having dignity in
their work if work is going to be such a
central part of existence in a capitalist system. Um
And so yeah, ju I mean, just trying
to eradicate it through philanthropy is also not going to
fix the problem. It has to come at the
level of actually valuing workers in their roles as workers
. Oh my God. So it was not just
that Marx was an alien but Hagel was also a
Marxist. Well, not everybody would agree with me
. But, but, yeah, I mean,
I, I think that's all, that's all very
clear to me. Um, that, that is
part of what Hagel was concerned about and, you
know, there are places in his philosophy where he
is also guilty of that kind of hypocrisy. So
it's not as if he had some sort of moral
genius that allowed him to see that in other parts
of his life. But I, I think that
was one place where he really did see the dangers
that we are living with very presently now. Yeah
. No, but I mean, I, I
made, I made that sort of a joke but
, uh, uh, I, if, uh
, he's, if you didn't mention his name,
just everything you said about poverty and capitalism that we
should structure society and all of that, I mean
, if someone told me it was Marx to,
I won't believe it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
. Yeah. I think that's true and that would
be true until we started talking about the state.
Right. So Hagel talks about all of this when
he's talking about civil society, which is the middle
one of the. So he talks about the family
and civil society and the state and its, when
he starts to talk about the state that you would
no longer think we were talking about Marx. Great
. So, uh we've already talked here a little
bit about uh comedy, but one of the things
you've also done work on, uh and again,
focusing on uh 19th century German philosophy is how seriously
some of these philosophers took laughter. Right. Yeah
. Or we might say like the laughable because it
, it's so hard to put all of the things
that we laugh at under uh and, and a
lot of things that are laughable, we don't actually
laugh at. So it's, it's a very thorny
um topic. But, but yes, especially around
the time when Hagel was writing. Um again,
people like Schlegel, um and some of the other
more romantic philosophers like Zolar um were taking this question
of what we laugh at and why or, or
what it means to differentiate between wit and irony and
humor really seriously. And I think that, uh
you know, Lessing was another one who took this
very seriously. Um Eta Hoffman, like the whole
constellation of people who were philosophical, but also writing
in literature. Um And I think again, it
comes back to this question, like, what does
it say about humans that we laugh? And what
does it say about us that we find this whole
range of things either funny or laughable? And what
could we determine about the essence of what it is
to be human by really trying to figure that out
? And if you're someone like Schlegel who thinks that
Hegel is wrong to imagine that we can articulate truth
in philosophy, then you're going to be looking towards
other forms that maybe as Schlegel would sort of put
it gesture at the truth while not articulating it.
Because articulating it is always going to introduce new categories
and therefore new division. So if the true is
the whole, I think Schlegel would say to Hegel
, um any conceptualization is just going to show the
division again. And if you want something that retains
the unity, it has to remain at the level
of affect or something like irony, which doesn't take
itself too seriously and doesn't define things, but sort
of says that things are true through saying they're opposite
or says something that's witty in a way that you
don't take literally, but you see the truth behind
it. Um So all of these are ways in
which a whole range of people in the romantic generation
decided that if we could understand that and the way
that functions in the way humans interact with each other
and lead our aesthetic lives, then we could probably
understand something much deeper about humans themselves and about metaphysics
quite honestly. Um So there's a lot of um
I edited a volume of essays about uh humor in
the 19th century. And as I say in the
introduction, usually when I tell people that they laugh
because um one of the things we laugh at is
incongruity and it feels so incongruous to talk about humor
in this generation of very serious philosophers, but it
is something they took really seriously. And I mean
, trying to understand something about our human nature through
laughter. I mean, there are many different ways
we can try to understand it. Right. And
I mean, even philosophers themselves, many different philosophers
across history uh have had different theories about why people
laugh at something. And, uh, I,
I mean, perhaps all of them are true.
I don't know because some, we laugh at different
things in different contexts for different reasons. I mean
, sometimes we might laugh at something because it's funny
and why it's funny is an entire question by itself
. But uh sometimes perhaps people laugh at someone to
mock them. Not exactly because it's funny, but
just to mock them or to feel superior to other
people, perhaps something, someone does something wrong.
Uh And they are, I mean, competing with
them and then the other person laughs just because,
oh, you made the mistake. So I'm in
a, in a better situation than you are or
something like that. So, I mean, the
, uh just thinking about laughter itself and the many
different contexts and reasons why people laugh is, uh
, I mean, it's, it's a very wide
uh field of inquiry, I guess. Yeah,
absolutely. Yeah. OK. So, um let's
get now into uh how you got interested in abolitionism
in America in the 19th century. So, tell
us first about that. What got you interested in
that and then we'll get into the work of Lydia
Maria Child. Yeah, this was, um,
a very direct response on my part to the 2016
election in the United States. So when, when
Donald Trump was elected, um it became very clear
to many of us that we were in a kind
of moral and political emergency. Uh So the real
resurgence of a kind of far right, political stance
and all of the other things that Trump represented,
including his um just open derision of and abuse of
women. And I think as a Hagel scholar,
I've always had to grapple a little bit with what
, how I felt when I would read Hagel scholarship
from the 19 thirties. And I would always have
in the back of my mind, what did this
person think they were doing? Um was what they
were doing more important than anything they could have been
doing to fight the rise of fascism in Germany.
Um And I don't pretend I don't mean to be
judgmental. I'm sure people have all kinds of reasons
, et cetera, but I just had a very
clear sense very quickly that I needed my professional life
and my scholarship to reflect the time that I was
living in. And I had a, I wanted
to know who in my own country and in my
own history. Um I could turn to as an
example of someone who had faced a moral emergency in
their country. Head on. And I just decided
I wanted to turn to women. I'd spent 20
years of my career really exclusively focusing on men.
And so I, I asked myself to fight something
as entrenched as enslavement was in the United States in
the 19th century. I just thought you'd have to
be thinking philosophically, you'd have to be asking big
questions like, what is equality, what is justice
? What does it mean to be a human?
What is moral obligation? Um So I went to
an archive associated with Harvard and that, that is
a, a library and an archive specifically about women
and asked if they knew of any women with a
kind of philosophical uh trajectory who had been involved in
abolitionism and they didn't. But they gave me a
box of letters that included a letter by this woman
who I'd never heard of, but um was immediately
just transfixed by her moral vision, her ability to
argue philosophically um and her ability to dedicate her life
to ending entrenched evil in her country. So I
decided to pivot towards doing something about her. And
at first I, I did write a couple of
more academic articles about her. She was definitely a
philosophical thinker. She also talked about philosophy. She
read philosophy, she was very influenced by German philosophy
. Um She regularly cites Schiller and Goethe and Harrier
and John Paul. She mentions Kant, she mentions
Hegel. German philosophy was very popular in the United
States. Um, in the 18 thirties and forties
when she started writing. So I had a lot
of pretty instant connections to her philosophical thinking. But
what really again got my attention was she wrote a
book in 18 33 and that's almost three decades before
the American Civil War started. So in 18 33
he wrote a book called An Appeal in Favor of
that class of Americans called Africans. And this,
this is just a fire hose of arguments denouncing all
of the bad arguments that Americans had been using to
justify slavery. And I was so impressed by how
she, I think her general philosophical commitment was to
thinking that humans are basically good, but they're susceptible
to bad arguments that appeal to their selfishness, their
self interest, their vanity. And if you can
just clear away those arguments, you can really get
them to reform. I'm not sure she was right
about that. I don't even think she thought she
was right about that by the end of her life
. Um But I became really fascinated both by her
as a philosophical thinker, but also as a woman
whose life intersects in all of the major moments leading
up to and through the American Civil War. Um
She did everything from put her body between abolitionist speakers
and anti abolitionist mobs. She wrote fiction and also
argumentative essays. She wrote biographies, she wrote histories
. Um She volunteered herself raising money for and sewing
for both union soldiers and, um, enslaved peoples
. So she, um, she was, she
is, to me a real example of someone who
took her role as an American citizen seriously and deployed
everything she could think of, uh, to address
what she saw as the great moral crisis in her
country. So I wrote a biography of her.
Um, again, I, I thought I would
just sort of write academic articles about her, but
the story is so compelling that I ended up writing
the whole thing and that came out um about six
months ago. Great. Uh And II, I
mean, uh we also have to keep in mind
that the 19th century was not to, to put
it mildly very women friendly and also for the most
part, not very friendly to any person who was
not of European descent, basically in, in terms
of the mainstream philosophers, thinkers, scientists and so
on. Uh I mean, of course, we
have to keep also in mind the cultural context back
then. And I, I'm also not one of
those people who, of course, I say that
that they were wrong in terms of their sexism and
racism. But I don't think that if I lived
back then I wouldn't have been racist and sexist myself
, of course, very likely I would have been
one as well and most of us, I guess
so. Uh But I mean, we have to
keep that, keep that in mind but also the
struggle that women and, uh, but, uh
African Americans and other minorities went through and particularly since
we are approaching things here from a philosophical perspective and
I am talking with U as an academic, I
mean, it's historically, it's a fact and even
con temporarily that, uh, women and, uh
, other minorities, uh, I mean, their
work has very much been neglected, sometimes suppressed and
, uh, stuff like that. Right. So
, it's, it's not been easy at all for
people who are not European white males and European white
males, particularly from the upper classes to have their
voices heard. Yeah. Yeah. And, and
there's really wonderful work being done on that. So
, um Kristen Yah and Dal and Nassar just last
year published a whole anthology of work by women philosophers
in Germany in the 19th century. And Alison Stone
and I are working on a handbook about British and
American women philosophers in the 19th century. There were
many more of them than we think there were.
And they were often much better known than we think
they were. So, what we're talking about is
a combination of, of course, women didn't have
the same opportunities as men as far as education goes
. But they, but even those who manage to
philosophize despite that were pretty actively repressed and forgotten later
, like not in their lifetimes but later. So
, so there's a lot of really interesting work on
that. Um that I I feel very passionate about
. And I, I also think to your other
point, it's really important for us to acknowledge in
as much detail as we can the damage that people
like Hagel did on these topics. So I think
even myself as a woman, I used to just
sort of think, well, of course, he
thought women were like plants like everybody did, but
that's not true. There were lots of people including
women who didn't think that, but there were,
he did have options available to him and even more
so on race. So there's a, there's really
important work by Daniel James and Franz Kopek and um
and, and others on what Hagel probably did know
about other ways of thinking about non European peoples which
he deliberately chose to ignore or suppress. And there's
even terrible stories about Hagel. Hagel's like philosophy of
history being used as a justification in the United States
for perpetuating slavery. And, you know, I
was talking earlier about Hagel's ability to pinpoint hypocrisies um
between in a culture that said on the one hand
, all humans are worthy of dignity and respect.
And on the other hand, subjecting them to capitalism's
woes. Obviously, Hagel himself is horrendously guilty of
doing that pretty much with anyone who wasn't, as
you said, an upper class white European male.
Um And I have become much less willing just to
say, wow, OK, that's like a part
of his philosophy, we can ignore um and much
more determined to take that head on and, and
as you say, too importantly, augmented with a
kind of humility that reminds myself as well, that
I'm probably on the wrong side of history on other
things. And that, um if I were living
at Hegel's time, I probably would have had many
opinions that were not very enlightened either. So,
to me, that's part of the, the general
project of thinking about the 19th century is elevating voices
like childs that are um so philosophical and so resonant
and using the same kinds of ideas, including ideas
about art that Hagel was interested in, but really
in the service of good and trying to be much
more mindful and critical of ways in which Hegel's philosophy
is beautiful and compelling as it can be um was
used for evil. Yeah. Uh I mean,
this is another entire discussion that I think is very
interesting that people can have. I mean, uh
and the same applies to artists. I mean,
sometimes people discuss if what we should do with the
work of immoral artists, if we should ban it
, if not, if we, if we don't
ban it, uh we should analyze it. Uh
We should think of it if we should appreciate it
or not and if we should criticize it, uh
I mean, there's uh an immensity of questions out
there that are very interesting about that. But,
but uh uh I mean, of course, Uh
I'm not myself and I don't think you are some
of those people. I think that perhaps we should
be because someone in the 19th century or the 18th
century had some appalling views on women and uh black
people and other minorities that we should just, uh
, I completely ignore or think that the rest of
their work is, doesn't have any intellectual valid validity
at all. But, uh yeah, it's very
much a well established fact that all of the people
we talked about in German philosophy in the 19th century
and Kent was mostly from the 18th century and,
and others like them. Uh I, I mean
, I, I it, it's interesting that even
Kent was talking about universal values but apparently they didn't
apply to uh non European people uh curiously enough.
But, but I, I mean, the same
thing I guess happened in other sorts of instances,
like, for example, you have the French revolution
and supposedly everyone should get a vote, everyone should
get the same. But it was just very gradually
that the population in France, uh the adult population
got to AAA right to vote. I mean,
first it was just uh one slice of the male
population and then, and the same in happened in
America, I think, I think that initially it
was just the, the people who, who owned
land, I guess whether the right to vote and
then it was, yeah, all of that was
in flux. For a very long time here.
That's true. And, and the other thing to
bring up, I think in the context of the
French revolution is the Haitian revolution. And the fact
that France absolutely did not want any of their revolutionary
principles to apply to a part of the world that
was primarily inhabited by Black people. Um So that
, that's another classic case of um of the kind
of hypocrisy that I think you're right. To me
, it just feels increasingly important to acknowledge those problems
always and upfront. And in every part of our
discussion of these earlier thinkers, um and never to
treat it as something we can just sort of mention
on the side and then move on from. Um
But I don't think that ignoring these people is good
either because it's important for us to remember that even
people who were intelligent and progressive in other ways um
could make really horrendous mistakes. And I, and
I guess that I it's not only important from a
sort of ethical standpoint but also intellectually speaking, I
guess it's enriching uh to uh have a better understanding
of how our socio cultural context can influence and have
an impact on our intellectual work, I guess.
Absolutely. Yeah, we, we need to understand
why we think what we think and understanding thinkers that
came before us is an indispensable part of that for
sure. A a and also keeping in keeping in
mind that again, people are not disembodied beings and
we live and we not only have a body but
we also live in a particular society in a particular
period of time, in a particular culture, we
have a ton of different in influences and we are
also products of all of that even intellectually. It's
not that we have some sort of reasoning faculty that
, that is impermeable to all of that and that
allow us to get some sort of glimpse into objective
reality as it is. Yeah. And I,
I'll also just say briefly, that's one of the
things that really fascinates me about child is that she
was able in many ways to transcend and to see
beyond what was absolutely the norm around her. And
I'm really fascinated by that. Um And I,
you know, most of your viewers will know that
. Um So she grew up in Boston, which
is in the north and most northerners now assume that
all northerners then were against slavery. And that's absolutely
not true. Absolutely not true. Many northerners actively
resisted the end of slavery in the South. So
she was surrounded by politicians and educators and journalists and
religious leaders who actively preached that this was an acceptable
way for society to be organized. And somehow she
saw beyond it. And she, you know,
she wasn't alone in that. And I'll also say
part of how she knew this is she actually talked
to black people, right? So she actually listened
to the people who were themselves affected. And once
was able to see it from their point of view
, realized that what she was hearing from the leaders
in her society was, was wrong. So again
, I don't mean to suggest that she had some
sort of, as you say, disembodied um experience
, but she was willing to listen in a way
that I take as an inspiration to those of us
who sometimes it's a kind of occupational hazard for philosophers
. We like to look at things from very high
up. And often I think it takes more of
a listening on the ground to um get real ethical
insight into what needs to happen next. By the
way, at least back in her time, how
influential was her, I mean, in the philosophical
world and more specifically in the abolitionist movement in the
US, she was very influential. She, she
was one of the most famous abolitionists um of the
19th century. And, and part of what's so
interesting about her is that she was famous before.
She became an abolitionist because she um almost unheard of
in the American 19th century by the age of 22
which would have been, you know, in the
mid 18 twenties, was a very well known novelist
and a self sufficient female author. And she'd written
a couple novels and a couple of self-help books,
um like cooking books or books about parenting or housekeeping
um that had made her really beloved and trusted along
among a great swath. I mean, she was
the 19th century equivalent of a household name. Um
And when she became an abolitionist, that was so
upsetting to her readers because it really meant that she
was a radical because to be, to be an
abolitionist in the 18 twenties and thirties in the United
States was to argue for the immediate end of slavery
without compensation to enslavers and most Americans in the North
and the South thought that that was just unthinkably radical
. Um But she, that's what she was convinced
. And, you know, by the time she
was about 30 she continued to be one of the
best published and most um public facing intellectuals of the
19th century. And certainly in the abolitionist movement as
far as her involvement in the philosophical community, it's
interesting, I mean, there wasn't so much like
philosophical tradition in the United States except really for the
one that was getting going again in Boston around Ralph
Waldo Emerson. And they did know each other.
They were almost exact contemporaries and she was admiring and
would go to his lectures. Um But also was
always concerned that he was allowing the abstraction of his
thought to distract him from what she thought he should
be doing, which was fighting slavery. So she'd
sometimes say he has a platform big enough and a
mind capacious enough really to make arguments against slavery and
he's not doing it. Um Emerson did come around
to doing that but only in 18 59 when John
Brown's failed insurrection in Virginia uh convinced him that slavery
needed to be um opposed. So she, she
certainly knew all of the philosophers in the Boston area
of her time and socialized with them, communicated with
them, but I think she feared that they had
disengaged themselves from the moral topics of their day.
Too much. OK. So uh I, I'm
also getting mindful of your time now. So let
me ask you, let me ask you one last
question. Uh And let me see if, if
I can phrase this correctly. So, uh and
be clear about it. Uh So, uh I
mean, there are some parts of philosophy that are
politically motivated, like for example, abolitionism is a
very clear example of that. And there are people
that tend to be a little bit dismissive of philosophy
that is done while politically motivated. And usually those
people from come from political positions that are opposite to
the, to the ones that they say are not
valid philosophy, of course. So the question I
wanted to ask you then is how do you look
at the place of a movement like abolitionism uh in
the broader historical context of philosophy? And uh uh
I mean, when it comes to how people look
again at politically motivated philosophy, I mean, to
what extent do you think we should take it seriously
? And, I mean, what do you think
basically about those people's position, the positions that,
oh, I, I mean, philosophy should be
about, I don't know people in academia. I
, I mean, it's, uh, transmitting knowledge
to students shouldn't be about, uh, turning them
into activists or something like that. So, uh
, I, I mean, I, I hope
I'm being clear in terms of the question I'm asking
here. But what are your thoughts on it?
Yeah, thank you. It's such a, it's
such an important question to me uh now, so
I appreciate the chance to think about it. Um
I guess a couple of things, first of all
, philosophy has not always been removed from reality.
And I think like the story of the 19th century
into the 20th century uh is much more about philosophy
deciding to extract itself from practice. And there are
historical reasons for that, but I think we're wrong
if we assume and I this isn't what you were
saying either. But I think some of the people
you're thinking about would say this, that, that
real philosophy shouldn't dirty its hands or shouldn't kind of
get involved in the world because then it's not as
pure, that's, that's a choice that philosophy has
made relatively recently as a discipline and it has to
do with the professionalization of philosophy um in the 19th
century, in the United States. Well, the
three cases I know most about are the US,
the UK and Germany, you, you couldn't get
a degree in philosophy no matter who you were in
for a long time. Right. Phd. S
weren't invented that long ago and even after they were
invented, they weren't necessary to philosophizing philosophical journals did
not use to require that you came from. Um
, you had a phd in philosophy to publish.
So, so the, the professionalization of philosophy has
meant that what it means to do philosophy has gotten
narrower and narrower and narrower, more elitist, more
professionalized. But there's a very long history of philosophy
being born out of grappling with the real world as
it were. Um And I don't think there's been
a social movement in history that hasn't required people to
think philosophically. Um I mean, Angela Davis is
a great example of someone who uh was doing a
phd in philosophy before she became an activist and brought
her um studies in Spinoza and Kant and Hegel to
her struggle for racial justice in the United States.
But I think pretty much anywhere you look, you
would find people who are fighting for justice thinking philosophically
. And I've been very happy to see people emphasizing
that more. So people are writing about Martin Luther
King as a philosopher for instance. Um And yeah
, I was going to say that perhaps another excellent
example would be the civil rights movement in the 19
sixties and seventies. Yeah, exactly. So,
so I think a, a more or an alternate
model and I think in some ways, a truer
model to philosophy's history is that when people are confronted
with injustices, they have to ask those bigger questions
. And I think what philosophy can do to empower
us is to give us some clarity about those questions
. So, you know, really what is justice
? Um you know, we can go back to
the Republic to find people trying to figure that out
. And so when I teach philosophy, I don't
at all think of myself as trying to turn my
students into activists. But I do think that I
want them to see that philosophy can be a really
powerful and even essential tool for understanding the terms of
our debates and the kinds of things we want to
fight for and then giving us the clarity of thought
that can motivate action. So when, when I
think about the way movements work, sometimes what happens
is people just aren't particularly clear what they're fighting for
and why and what that means is that whenever there's
infighting or tension or unclear, like you can just
lose focus and get, you know, distracted by
the details. But the better you are at saying
no, I thought this through philosophically, even if
you don't phrase it that way. This is what
is important, this is what back to Hagel really
creating a society in which people can truly be free
and not just abstractly free. This is what it
would look like that that is empowering and motivating in
a way that can help us stave off the kind
of burnout or fatalism that is all too often the
death of movements for justice. So I would prefer
to think philosophy is as something that is born out
of humans, just trying to figure our way out
in the world. And the more those of us
who are inclined to think philosophically can articulate those thoughts
and help people think them through. I think the
better chance philosophy has of actually fulfilling a good purpose
in the world. Yeah, a and perhaps,
I mean, people who might be worried uh about
keeping some of the philosophical traditions of the West,
perhaps they should also keep in mind that if Plato
is the father of Western philosophy, then he wrote
a book titled The Republic, which which I I
it would be very hard to argue that it's not
politically motivated because it's literally a book about how to
, to, to structure politically a society from top
to bottom. So, yeah, very good.
Yeah, absolutely. And the more I think we
recognize that philosophy has been done in many different ways
. So like the academic article really new, I
mean, we think about like Plato writing and dialogues
and Aristotle giving lectures and you know, k writing
something more that we recognize as philosophy, but people
writing philosophically through literature, Nietzsche through aphorisms, like
many of our most important philosophers have been really disruptive
of what people thought philosophy was. And so I
, I do not feel like my time is well
spent fighting for a version of philosophy that I think
is pretty historically contingent, sometimes harmful and not where
the real energy of philosophy should be great. So
, uh let's wrap up the interview here then uh
just before we go and by the way, I'm
also leaving a link in the description box to your
book Lydia on Lydia Maria Child. Uh and apart
from the book, would you like to tell people
where they can find you and your work on the
internet? Yes, thank you. I do have
a website which is just Lydia Moland dot com.
And I am also on Twitter. I think that's
Lydia underscore Moland and I have maybe two things on
Instagram. So I'm not, uh I'm not,
never been a big social media person. I'm getting
my dipping my toes in a little bit, but
um Twitter is where I post the most and I
do try to keep the website updated. So people
are more interested in in any of my writing.
Um All of my writing is listed on the website
and what I'm working on now is um findable on
Twitter. Ok, great. So, Doctor Molan
, thank you very much for your time and it's
been a real pleasure to talk to you. Likewise
. Thanks for your very insightful and detailed questions.
I really enjoyed it. Hi guys. Thank you
. For watching this interview until the end. If
you liked it, please do not forget to like
it, share, comment and subscribe. And if
you like more generally, what I'm doing, please
consider support the show on Patreon or paypal. You
have all of the links in the description of this
interview. This show is brought to you by en
lights learning and development done differently. Check their website
at alights dot com. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters per Larson Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunda Bernards
, all of election and Weser, Adam Castle Matthew
Whitting Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim Hoy,
Eric, Alania, John Connors, Philip Forrest,
Connelly, Robert Winde Ruin. Nai Zoup, Mark
Nevs Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus, Phil Kor Michael
Stormer, Samuel Andreev for the S Alexander Dan Bauer
Fergal Ken Hall, her OG Michel Jonathan. Lebron
Jars and the Samuel K Eric Heins, Mark Smith
, Jan Wera Amal Sran David Sloan Wilson Yasa,
Des Roma Roach Diego JP Dr Man, NCO Bar
. We and Pao Assy Naw Guy Madison Gary GH
. Some of the Adrian Yin Nick Golden Paul talent
in Ju Bar was Julian Price Edward Hall Eden Bronner
, Douglas Fry Franca Bertolotti Gabriel Pan Cortez, Lelis
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith,
John Wiesman, Martin Aland, Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul George Arnold Luke Lo A Georges the
often Chris Williamson, Peter Oren David Williams, the
Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex. Shaw and
Murray Martinez Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry Daley Junior
, Holt Eric B. Starry Michael Bailey. Then
Sperber, Robert Grassy Rough the RP MD. Ior
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell
, Richard Bowen Thomas the Dauber Luke Ni Andre story
, Manuel Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson and Benjamin Gilbert.
A special thanks to my producers is our web gem
Frank Luca, Tom Weam Bernard Ni Ortiz Dixon Benedict
Mueller, Vege, Gli Thomas Trumble, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Robert Lewis and
Al Nick Ortiz. And to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Serge Adrian and Bogdan Kut. Thank
you for all.